13. Wisdom Literature
But so much of order, uh, is what you see in the proverbs, don't you?

Right?

Relationship between a sluggard and his fruit, which is usually starvation, right?

Or how about all the ones that talk about money, right?

How people who try to earn money quickly, and actually end up broke versus those who earn slowly, gaining little by little, are the ones that end up being wealthy.

Or how about the stories of the people who try to hoard versus those who are generous and giving, and how the Lord says, those who hoard will end up with less, then those who freely give.

Right?

Because the Lord wants us to be free and generous in giving.

Or how about some very confusing things that we see like in Ecclesiastes, right?

I mean, isn't the very premise of that book all about, more is better?

So you get more wives, get more crops, get more this, more of that, more of that.

When at the end of the day, his conclusion is, oh, more is not better.

Okay?

So here he is.

He's searching for order, thinking more is better when in reality, more actually made him feel more bankrupt.

Like he actually had less.

And in many ways, the book of ecclesiastes, I think, speaks to our current context here, in this super consumerism of North America that we live in, right?

I'm bombarded every day.

From emails to letters, to junk mail, to, you name it.

And you watch TV, you're going to get commercials, right?

Of saying, You need this.

You need a better car, which I do.

But anyway, that's another story.

Okay.

Uh, I'd like my car to actually survive, but who knows what's gonna happen, right?

But it is so paradoxical, isn't it?

We think, well, if I just get that next raise, life will be so much better.

If my wife gets that promotion, oh, life will be so much better, if my kid goes to middle school, life will be so much better.

Why don't you ask those who have been through that?

And I think they'll tell you, you're just gonna wait for that next thing.

Research has bored this out too.

If you guys haven't noticed, there's been some research done on what brings happiness to people, and it has been fairly obvious, at least to the researchers, that things do not make people happy.

They found experiences help people feel happy.

So they were encouraging people not to invest on buying things, but to invest on having experiences.

So going with your father, to watch, I don't know, an opera, or a play, or a great ballet performance.

That experience, though might be as expensive as buying this beautiful thing, will present and give you lasting happiness, a much longer term, in which you will reflect upon that, than, say, getting that particular item.

And I think that's, I think that is so true.

And yet we so often fall prey to buying that next thing.

And, uh, I'll be the first to admit that that is a deep temptation for me, is to get that next thing, right?

And I have to fight myself to not do that, because I know that that's not ultimately gonna bring me much joy.

So I want to just encourage you, as we continue to walk this life and maybe even have children, and how do we actually teach them?

How do we impart to them?

What are some of the lessons that we want to teach them in terms of what is good and what is not?

And I already told you guys the McDonald's Happy Meal Toy story, right?

Okay?

How, as a family, we decided not to do that anymore, 'cause it was pointless, not really benefiting anybody.

Okay?

So search for order.

Now there is a relationship here, and the third thing, between wisdom and creation.

Wisdom and creation.

And the relationship there is, in terms of how we deal with God's creation.

And the connection there between us and his creation as well.

There's obviously the Job interaction with God, right?

God says, where were you?

When I laid the foundations of this world.

Where were you?

Right?

When I did all of this other stuff.

He even says, where were you when the fawn gives birth?

Where were you when this happened?

And obviously, Joe was nowhere to be found.

He wasn't even alive. When those things happened, right?

So there's some of that creation relationship there.

But there's also this relationship between...

I finally found a quote.

You want me to read it now?

Okay.

Now I know where I had that quote.

Okay.

All right, let me read it here.

George Ernest Wright says or said, wisdom literature does not fit into the type of faith exhibited in the historical and prophetical literatures.

And then, uh, Walter Icro said there is a strongly secular flavor.

And it is only loosely connected with religious faith.

I don't believe so.

I think they're talking specifically about wisdom literature.

Yeah.

Because in the Psalms I think there's very obvious connections there.

So that would be, you would be in big trouble to try to do that.

Okay?

Again, there's this relationship between wisdom and creation, this wisdom of how we can learn from God's creation.

Lord willing, I'm going to be going on a little trip down the Grand Canyon this summer to learn about how God created this world.

I hope to learn a lot.

Because there's much to be learned from God's creation.

But they're also talking about how we can learn from our animals.

I mean, isn't that one of the greatest things of animal planet or national geographic, for those of you who are really into that stuff?

I mean, you can sit there for days, just gazing at all the things that we learn about animals and how they behave.

Right?

You learn about the strengths of certain animals, how they treat their young.

And then you learn about other animals that don't quite treat their young so well.

Right, and have no problems at all.

Letting the young just go out, and who knows?

Gets killed.

They're just a complete separation.

Whereas some animals are holding on, as long as possible until that child, that child is able to defend itself. In some way, in some form.

So wonderful things that we can learn.

And wisdom has a connection between that, learning from God's creation.

And the last area here is, is there anything particular about Yaveh?

That we can learn from wisdom literature.

Okay.

Is there anything in particular?

And I think one of the ways that Murphy helps us to understand this is to kind of view this as, here is the Sinai covenant.

Right?

So here is pre-Israel, right?

They are not a nation.

Okay, here they are now a nation, God's covenant people.

Right?

And he says that wisdom literature is talking about this part.

So there's really no need to talk about any overt covenant process.

There's no need to talk about any overt covenant laws.

There's no need to talk about any overt God specific actions to bring about the covenant, okay?

But to talk about how do we now actually live this out in relationship to the Lord, to Yave.

So that's why he argues that you're not going to see Yaveh mention anywhere.

In fact, if you look at all the wisdom literature, you're never going to see the word the Lord.

The Lord, this or the Lord, that.

The covenant, this, or covenant that.

I don't even think you see the word David. In any of the wisdom literature.

But that doesn't mean that because it's not mentioned, that it's not talking about this particular relationship.

Right?

We learned that about the book of Esther last time, didn't we?

Okay, just because God is not mentioning Esther doesn't mean that God is not actually at work.

Okay, the same ideas here. Being presented here, and that that's the argument that is being made here, and I think it's helpful.

Alright?

And wisdom literature is, in so many ways, helpful on a lot of different levels.

And so I want to just pause there.

I know we didn't get a chance to interact much about wisdom literature as a class.

This is your sort of your mini chance at doing that.

So are there any questions or thoughts on wisdom literature, as you have looked at it in the past, or even this semester, that you want to kind of talk about.

Yes.

So what did the message actually...

Can you give us an example of how they would translate deer, or, you know, mountains, or vineyards to help you to understand it?

Sure, enlightenment.

I have never read the message in the song of song, so I don't know what that's like.

But do others here share similar reactions to Solomon?

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah, and I think I think the Jewish people felt the same way.

Because I think traditionally, and this is just, I don't have any data or hardproof or anything like that, but I believe traditionally, they had forbidden men to read it until they reached a certain age. Because of that.

You know, so I think, um, I've heard the customary age to be 30 before they were permitted to read it.

I mean, that's been my understanding.

Yes.

I should invite them to read in a message, then.

Speaking of which, do you have some examples for us?

A little embarrassed?

Well, can you find ones that are not so embarrassing?

Well, I'll give you some more time.

How's that?

I'll buy you some more time.

Anybody else?

Any other books or.. Of wisdom, literature that you want to reflect on a little bit here?

Yes.

I mean, there's even a...

I don't know how significant a group of this is, but there's a fair number of folks who argue that this is not even Israelite.

You look at the names of his friends, none of them have Israelite names, Hebrew names at all, right?

So, that's kind of one of the, the whole secular flavor that Walter Eiker was talking about, saying, it definitely has that, because, I mean, it seems like it's a story about a person who's a God fear. But not necessarily an Israelite.

Okay, oh, we're back to Simon Solomon, okay?

Yes.

Well, we don't know when he actually wrote it, right?

So there is that element of the unknown.

Somebody from the other class said, who better than Solomon to tell you if he's had that many wives?

He would know what is the quality of a good wife, and, uh, than those of us with just one, not much to compare to there.

I mean, you take it as you wish, I guess.

But I think, ultimately, it comes down to is, if we are expecting a perfect person to write God's word, you're not gonna find anybody. Who has written God's word, who was perfect.

And so we know that there is a mysterious element of the Holy Spirit here, revealing things, and that could very well have happened through Solomon.

And at least we believe that's the case.

Right?

Yeah.

It appears that way, too.

That has been commonly attributed to him.

Yeah, it...

Because the word Solomon never actually appears there.

Yeah.

So, that's, that's, um, that's probably true, but.. It's been traditionally a tribute to him, just as Song of Solomon has.

Now, I think certain English translations no longer use some of Solomon, is that right?

They just say song of songs?

Yeah.

Is that what the ESP says now?

Is song of songs?

The NIV too?

Yeah.

Yeah, so I think only certain versions still stick with the song of Solomon, and most just go into the generic song of songs.

All right.

Any other last thoughts on wisdom literature before we move on to New Testament implications and thoughts and all that other stuff.

Yes.

Funeral's clearer, yes.

It's over.

It's done.

Unless the resurrection takes place, it's done.

Yes.

But there are some difficult things, too.

If it's a funeral of a person who's not a believer, for example, it's a little bit more challenging.

I haven't decided what I'm gonna do, but I know that there are some pastors who actually prepare their own sermon for their own funeral.

I don't know.

Maybe I'll do that one day.

I have no idea.

I have not thought about that.

But, uh, that's something to, to think about, and maybe you can set the tone, through that message.

All right.

All right, some New Testament implications and considerations here.

I wanted to remind you of some of the connections that I had already made.

Remember, the mission of God is clarified in Genesis 12, 1 to 3, and reiterated in Matthew 28, 18 through 20.

I want to remind you, I think, oftentimes, people have looked at the difference between Genesis 12, and Matthew 28, as Genesis 12 is, Come, and see what it's like for God's people, what it's like to live as God's people, and people have concluded that Matthew 28 is, We've got to go out and show them.

Tell them, you know, publicly proclaim.

And I'm here to tell you, at least for my understanding, that this still had the outward concept in mind, just because of the location of where Israel is, and Canaan is, being that it's the main land bridge between two of the major civilizations, Egypt down here, and then you've got Assyria and Babylonia on this end, where they had to actually go through that language to trade.

It was not as emphasize because people were going to come to you.

All I'm saying here is that because there is no longer Israel, specifically, in Jerusalem, in particular, it then became necessary to talk about how you are to take the gospel to the other ends of the earth, right, but never in that context or that plan is there anything saying, you should no longer function like Christians in your context.

That's always been there.

In other words, Matthew 28 doesn't supersede Genesis 12.

It simply adds a second dimension of going out, as well as being an example where you are.

So even today, I would say the majority of missions and evangelism is still done at the home context.

Okay, the majority of it is still being done.

People are coming to know Christ because of people being faithful believers in their home context.

Okay?

Right?

So understand that that's still the primary means by which we are to share the gospel.

That's why people who study this kind of stuff, say cold turkey evangelism, right, just showing up to somebody's house, sharing the gospel, is rarely effective, because there's nothing for them to compare. What you're saying with your life, because they don't know you.

Right?

So it's rarely effective, but it can be, if God had ordained all of those things to work for that situation.

But most of the time, they find far more effective is when you actually invite people into your life. Neighbors, classmates, coworkers, community leaders, or whoever it is, right?

You're inviting them into your life, and you're sharing your life with them.

And that's far more effective, because they're actually seeing what you're saying, or what you're saying about the Bible, actually play out in your life.

And so that's, I think, in many ways, still very much included in Matthew 28, even though it's not talking about that specifically.

Yes.

I'm not surprised to hear that.

I mean, I know Paul felt that he was, once he goes to Rome, it's done.

You know, he's done with his missions. Because he thought that was the ends of the earth for him.

You know, so that's, that doesn't surprise me.

That's the way he felt, or that they felt that way.

But I'm not sure I would agree with that.

Keep in mind that the prophecies, the few that are there in the prophetical books, as well as in some of the other historical accounts, of the coming Messiah comes true in Jesus Christ.

This is the primary argument that Paul makes wherever he goes in the New Testament, right?

Over and over again, in the book of Acts, you read about him going to this place, and that place in which he is trying to convince people that the Messiah really was Christ.

Okay, that Jesus was the Messiah.

Because his primary audience was not Gentile, but his primary audience was Jewish.

He wanted to help them understand the Old Testament scriptures in a way that makes sense for them.

Okay?

And it does come true in Jesus Christ, and will come true further when he returns.

All right, so there's a little bit of that here and the not yet.

Keep in mind that the greatest commandment.

Jesus responds by saying, from Deuteronomy 6, to love the Lord your God, And then he says, to love your neighbor as your self.

And remember, that second command, does not come from Deuteronomy, but actually comes from Leviticus.

What does it mean to love your neighbor as yourself?

And there are many laws in the book of Leviticus that show us what that means.

How do you actually love a neighbor like yourself?

Well, here's how you would do it.

And it gives us example after example.

Right?

I would suggest to you that the relationship between the old and New Testaments has more continuity than this continuity.

Now, I'm not saying it doesn't have any discontinuity.

For example, I wish we could, but we no longer sacrifice animals.

I wish we could.

I really do.

Not because I'm an animal hater or anything like that, but because I think it adds, shall we say, a multi sensory experience of what the effects of sin are in our lives.

And I spend quite a bit of time in my Hebrew class talking about this a little bit, because I tell people that in the way we do with sin today in the church context, which is silently pray, You're forgiven, we're done.

I find it very difficult for that kind of process to remind us of how devastated or how devastating our sins are to God, and how it actually costs something in Christ to deal with those sins, and how painful that was, and I can only point you to movies like The Passion, to help you to remind you how painful that was, right?

And that it requires something from us.

Right?

And I think the sacrifice, animal sacrifice in particular, brings that to life a lot better than the way we do things.

Right?

Today.

So I'm not saying that's true with everybody.

I'm just simply saying that I think it's sin is all too often treated too lightly, and it's dealt with too lightly.

And we say, because of Jesus, that's all I need to do.

And I think sometimes there's a bit of a...

I don't know.

I don't know what the best word is, but you get what I'm saying?

All right, yes.

When you're doing animal sacrifice, you are actually laying your hands on the animal.

So you are physically transferring your sins onto this animal.

And if our reading is correct, you are to actually slaughter the animal. To use slaughter the animal.

So not only are you transferring, you're the one actually taking the life of that animal, saying, Because of my sins, you have to die.

And to me, that would strike us a lot deeper, would make it memorable, shall we say, an experience, that you will not easily forget?

And remind you again, saying, I need to be careful with what I do or what I say, or how I respond to people, because I don't want to have to keep doing that.

Taking the life of that animal because of what I did.

Yeah, I think it would really benefit the church if we figure out more multi sensory ways to deal with sin.

And I've seen some examples of it that are good.

I don't know if you guys have ever done this before, but say at a campsite, when you guys go out of church or treat or something, and you'll start a campfire, and people will record their sins, and they would go burn it, to demonstrate God forgiving us, and yet require something actively on our part, and just simply pray and be done.

Things of that nature.

I mean, there are certain things we can do to make it more than just me, my head, and God, and we're done.

Yes.

Of communion.

I think it can be.

I don't think it's always done that way.

Yeah.

I think it has to be intentionally done that way.

I think one of the more meaningful ways of doing the Lord's Supper would be to encourage people to deal with the offenses with each other before they partake in the Lord's Supper.

I think that's an area that's missed in the church law.

The Bible says very clearly, before you take the elements, that you are to go deal with whatever wrongs you have against a brother or sister.

Right?

And we completely ignore that.

I think that's a deep mistake that the church has to recover.

When think of the Lord's Prayer.

What does it say?

Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive those who trespass against us.

We don't see God's forgiveness because we deserve it.

We do it because we forgive other people who trespass against us.

It's a natural cycle.

We don't forget, we just keep saying, forgive, forgive, forgive.

I not going to forgive you.

You know, that's a deep mistake.

Because God reminds us over and over again.

The way you judge others, I will judge you.

So if we say, I'm not gonna forgive you, God's gonna say, then I won't forgive you, either.

That's not a good place to be. Trust me.

That is not a good place to be.

Right?

So keep that in mind.

I'm not in any way saying that the Old and New Testaments are the same.

I'm just simply saying that I think there's more connections than there are disconnections.

So keep that in mind.

Whenever possible, try to understand the New Testament story in light of the Hebrew Bible, right?

Instead of trying to read the Hebrew Bible in light of the New Testament story.

So whenever possible, try to do that.

Keep in mind, the New Testament builds on the Old Testament, right?

So if you ever meet a new believer who says, I'm a part of the new generation.

I only need to carry around a New Testament, make sure you remind them that you will have no idea what you're reading.

Okay, if you don't read the Old Testament, and understand it as well.

So keep that in mind as you are trying to read and to understand the story.

All right?

However, the biggest strand that's the most helpful is this idea of being in a covenantal community with God.

We are still in that covenantal community.

That's why I can say the cloud of witnesses includes Abraham. In my life, because I'm part of that same community.

I'm not Israel, okay?

I'm not ethnic Israel.

But according to Romans, I have been ingrafted.

And now they are.

The history is my history.

And I need to embrace that, and I need to understand that.

So just as Israel can recite and celebrate and remember the Lord's work during the Passover. During the last plague, so can I. I can rejoice in that and be a part of that.

One of the good experiences I had was I went to a Passover Seder when I was in college.

It was a wonderful experience, just being with them, experiencing how they responded, how they remember God's wonderful deeds of kindness during the Passover, right?

So I want to just encourage you, to do your best, to do your best to experience that community. And the connections that we have with the, with the Jewish people, who were God's covenant community, and now expanded to the church, right?

So I want to just encourage you to keep doing that, recognize whenever there are connections between the Old and the New Testaments, that you need to study what happened in the Old Testament first, so that you can understand what's going on in the new, all right?

And things of that nature, all right?

One of the encouraging things, and I'll end here and give you a moment to pause and think about things.

One of the encouraging things that I heard was that Rob Bell, who founded a church up in Ryan Rapids, is it Mars Hill?

Is that the name?

Yeah.

Now, somebody told me, I don't know how accurate this is, but I assume it's, I had a good source, so I'll say it, like it's true.

I believe that he made it a point to preach from Leviticus in the first year of that church.

Because he felt so convicted that the church would not understand the work of Christ, if they didn't first understand the book of Leviticus.

What more can I say?

You might have all kinds of negative things you want to say about that church, but when I hear that, my heart is warned.

Because I see a church that recognizes that you cannot fully understand.

I mean, you can understand in small ways, but you will never fully understand the work of Christ on the cross unless you first read about it.

The whole point of sacrifice.

What is that supposed to do?

How does a holy God, an infinitely holy God, relate to me, who is so finitely unholy?

How does that work?

And that's one of the ways in which we are reminded of this relationship.

And so I want to just encourage you.

I hope that you found the reading of the Hebrew Bible to be helpful for you.

And I would be delighted if you would make a mentioner or two of that in the course evals to encourage me.

As, I hope, have the emails been sent already, about corsey vows.

Oh, really?

Hmm, I thought these were all automated.

Oh, well, I'll have to find out.

Anyway, who's the first year here?

Never been to Covenant before.

Okay.

I need to, I need to give you a brief word or two about it.

As part of our ongoing desire to do a multiple, do a bunch of things.

One is to get a feedback loop going between student and faculty, through the administration, who gets to see this as well.

We have a course eval system that is done through the portal.

Okay?

And those of you who are second years, you all know about this, all right?

That's one element, there's another element that is, increasingly, schools are being asked to demonstrate that what we are actually doing is actually working for you.

Like, if I'm going to teach you about something that you're actually learning it.

And so they want us to demonstrate proof of that.

So that's our second leg of the whole purpose of why we're doing this, all right?

Can I just encourage you to go ahead and fill in the evalves?

It's helpful to me.

If there is something in this class, or the format, or the assignments that you did not like, and you're going to write about it, I would prefer to hear that from you directly.

Okay?

I was told, in faculty meeting, to remind you, that even in these Corsi vows, you are to be a Christian, in the way you treat us, okay?

Maybe you will never do that, but, unfortunately, people have taken on the course of your vows as a blog to rant and rave about things that really doesn't help us, because, unfortunately, because of one too many of those cases, some faculty members don't even bother reading them anymore.

Because all it does is they just feel hurt, and they just walk away and say, I don't want to read that again.

So if you want us to actually learn from them, right?

Please apply grace and charity and compassion as you do so.

But if you really think you need to talk about something, because, say something I've said, offended you, let's practice Matthew 18.

And the Corsi eval is not Matthew 18.

Matthew 18 means you need to come and talk to me.

Whether it's by phone or in person.

All right?

Can I have I made myself clear on what to do?

Okay.

So anyway, that's something that you are going to be asked to do, if not already, you will be asked to do in the coming days.

And I believe you have, in years past, we've made you do it before, like today. Would have been the day you would have had to do it, but now we've extended it beyond finals, so that you have some time to reflect on the final day.

You don't have.

So you can even reflect on that wonderful joy and excitement that you have in this class.

All right?

I have taken too much of your time.

Thank you for being with me.

I've learned a lot, interacting with you all.

I'm quick thing about the papers.

I have started grading them, but it's kind of, as I'm grading, I'm posting the grade, so if you don't have a grade, it just means I haven't gotten to it.

Okay?

So please don't get upset.

And eventually, I will send it back to you with my few comments that I have for it.

But just letting you know I've started it already, okay?

So...

I guess you can have a good lower stay, but I won't see you next week.

Or at least not in class.
